PEP: 9999
Title: Recording the source hash of installed distribution
Author: Noah Gorny <noah.bar.ilan@gmail.com>
Sponsor: ??? <???>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 5-Jul-2020
Post-History:
Discussion-To:

Abstract
========

Currently, after installation, the hash of the downloaded sdist/wheel is not recorded.

This proposal defines
additional metadata, to be added to the installed distribution by the
installation front end, which records the source hash for use by
consumers which introspect the database of installed packages (see PEP 376).

Motivation
==========

The original motivation of this PEP was to permit tools with a "freeze"
operation allowing a Python environment to be recreated to extend their capabilities
and provide a secure way to generate hash-pinned requirements.

Specifically, the PEP originated from the desire to address `pip issue #4732`_:
i.e. improving the behavior of ``pip freeze`` to allow it to output installed packages hash,
in order to allow easy pinning of the requirements, and easy reproduction
of the environment using hash-checking mode.

Freezing an environment
-----------------------

Pip also sports a command named ``pip freeze`` which examines the Database of
Installed Python Distributions to generate a list of requirements. The main
goal of this command is to help users generating a list of requirements that
will later allow the re-installation the same environment with the highest
possible fidelity.

However, you can not currently output the installed distribution's hash,
as this information is not stored and can not always be computed at run time
from local information.
This means that there is no easy way to output source hashes using `pip freeze`.

The advantages of installing in hash-checking mode
--------------------------------------------------
As noted in the pip `user guide`__, hash-checking mode allows for increased
fidelity in case of compromised PyPI or HTTPS cert chain, or in the case of
package change without version changing. This approach allows for easier and more
secure automated server deployment.

It is also labor-saving alternative to running private index server with approved
packages. It can also substitute for a vendor library, providing easier
upgrades and less VCS noise.

Rationale
=========

This PEP specifies a new ``HASH`` metadata file in the
``.dist-info`` directory of an installed distribution.

The fields specified are sufficient to retrieve source distribution hash,
of various algorithms. The line by line format allows for algorithms to be
inserted and deleted in the future easily.

Specification
=============

This PEP specifies a ``HASH`` file in the ``.dist-info`` directory
of an installed distribution, to record the source hash of the distribution.

The canonical source for the name and semantics of this metadata file is
the `Recording the source hash of installed distribution`_ document.

This file SHOULD be created by installers in any installation.

This file MUST be formatted as lines of ``hash_algorithm:hash``.
``hash_algorithm`` specifies the hash algorithm used, it is RECOMMENDED that
only hashes which are specified here be used for source distribution hashes.
At time of writing, that list consists of 'sha256', 'sha384', and 'sha512'
as those are the preferred algorithms used by ``pip``'s hash-checking-mode.
``hash`` specifies the hash result of the hash algorithm operation on the
source distribution, represented as lower-case hexadecimal ASCII string.

Note about different types of sources
-------------------------------------

Distribution can be obtained with different type of packaging. One example would
be the ``wheel`` format (PEP 427), and another would be source distribution (sdist).
We need to note that we should take the hash of the ``source``, regardless of his type
this means that we should save the hash of the original sdist ``tar.gz`` and not
of the resulting built wheel as wheel building is nondeterministic.
In any case, we take the single compressed file that we downloaded,
calculate his hash, and place the results in the final HASH file.

Use cases
=========

"Freezing" an environment

  Tools, such as ``pip freeze``, which generate requirements from the Database
  of Installed Python Distributions SHOULD exploit ``HASH``
  if it is present, and give it priority over other means to generate hashes, in order
  to generate a higher fidelity output. Tools are not required to output the hashes
  in the default use-case, and it is RECOMMENDED to allow this option via a specialized flag.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Since this PEP specifies a new file in the ``.dist-info`` directory,
there are no backwards compatibility implications.

Alternatives
============

There are various alternatives, which all share the same problem- they generate
hashes from remote sources, as they can not generate hash from the local
installation (unless saved in cache).

pipenv
------
Environment manager that organizes your python environment using ``Pipfile.lock``
which contains hashes of the distribution source. Those hashes are obtained ``after``
installation, using remote queries of the warehouse API. This solution works, but
requires you to use pipenv to manage all of your python package environment.
It also queries the hashes from the remote, which, if intercepted, can be modified with
regardless of actual local distribution original hash.

References
==========

.. _`pip issue #4732`: https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/4732
.. _`user guide`:  https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/user_guide/#hash-checking-mode


Acknowledgements
================

Various people helped me created this PEP. I drew much inspiration from PEP 610,
created by Stéphane Bidoul. Paul F. Moore and Tzu-ping Chung provided nice ideas
and helped me to improve and create this PEP.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.


..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
